Allow SPECIALISE to work with expressions (#493)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-specialise-expressions.rst

.. author:: Richard Eisenberg
.. date-accepted::
.. ticket-url::
.. implemented::
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal is `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/493>`_.
.. contents::
.. sectnum::

GHC today supports ``SPECIALISE`` pragmas (American spelling also accepted) that cause
GHC to create a (partially) monomorphised version of a polymorphic function, often
increasing efficiency::

  addMult :: Num a => a -> a -> a
  addMult x y = x * 2 + y

  {-# SPECIALISE addMult :: Int -> Int -> Int #-}

With the ``SPECIALISE`` pragma, GHC will produce ::

  addMultInt :: Int -> Int -> Int
  addMultInt x y = x * 2 + y
  {-# RULES "addMult/Int" addMult = addMultInt #-}  -- NB: applies only at type Int

Note that ``addMultInt`` uses no indirection in its use of addition and multiplication,
unlike ``addMult``, which makes two calls to dictionary functions, confounding branch
prediction and slowing down execution. The ``RULE`` means that GHC will replace
all calls of ``addMult`` at ``Int`` to use the faster version.

The syntax of today's ``SPECIALISE`` requires a function and its specialised type.

> This proposal suggests to generalise the syntax of ``SPECIALISE`` to allow an
> arbitrary expression, not just a function name and a type. Happily, this is backward
> compatible, because type signatures are expressions, too. This will allow, for example ::

Reviewer: Not quite an arbitrary expression, right?
```suggestion
This proposal suggests to generalise the syntax of ``SPECIALISE`` to allow a
function application with an optional type signature, not just a function name and a type. Happily, this is backward
compatible. This will allow, for example ::
```

Reviewer 2: yes!

  {-# SPECIALISE addMult @Double #-}

>   {-# SPECIALISE addMult (5 :: Int) #-}

Reviewer: What about
```haskell
{-# SPECIALISE addMult 5 :: Int -> Int #-}
```
which I think is currently forbidden by the syntax, but could be accepted?

call sites of ``frob`` pass in a literal ``True`` or ``False``. Really, it would
make sense to have ``frobHelper1`` and ``frobHelper2`` as separate functions, but
that would cause unhappy duplication of all the complexity inherent in ``frob``.

With the ability to specialise expressions, we can write ::

  {-# SPECIALISE frob True #-}
  {-# SPECIALISE frob False #-}

This will make two copies of ``frob``, one for ``True`` and one for ``False``. These
will then be optimised to make direct calls to ``helper1`` or ``helper2``, respectively.
Call sites (that use a literal ``True`` or ``False``) will be rewritten to use the
specialised versions.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

1. Here is the new BNF for ``SPECIALISE`` pragmas::

     pragma ::= ...
             |  '{-#' specialise_keyword activation rule_foralls specexp '#-}'
             |  '{-#' specialise_keyword activation qvar '::' types1 '#-}'  -- as today

     specialise_keyword ::= 'SPECIALISE' | 'SPECIALIZE' | 'SPECIALISE INLINE' | 'SPECIALISE INLINE'

     specexp ::= qvar
              |  specexp aexp
              |  specexp '@' atype

> 

Reviewer: This would allow `{-# SPECIALISE addMult 5 :: Int -> Int #-}`, although it makes `{-# SPECIALISE qvar :: type #-}` ambiguous. (Perhaps we can resolve the ambiguity by having the "backwards compatibility alternative" kick in only when there are at least two types?)

```suggestion
              |  specexp :: type
              
```

Reviewer 2: I have fixed this

Allow expressions in SPECIALISE pragmas
=======================================

> .. author:: Richard Eisenberg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. author:: Richard Eisenberg, Simon Peyton Jones
```

a case like this ::

  frob :: Bool -> ...
  frob b ... = ...
    where
      ... if b then helper1 else helper2 ...

The function ``frob`` is a big, complicated function. Deep in its bowels, it
either uses ``helper1`` or ``helper2`` to do a critical step. However, most (or maybe all)
call sites of ``frob`` pass in a literal ``True`` or ``False``. Really, it would
make sense to have ``frobHelper1`` and ``frobHelper2`` as separate functions, but
that would cause unhappy duplication of all the complexity inherent in ``frob``.

With the ability to specialise expressions, we can write ::

  {-# SPECIALISE frob True #-}
  {-# SPECIALISE frob False #-}

This will make two copies of ``frob``, one for ``True`` and one for ``False``. These
will then be optimised to make direct calls to ``helper1`` or ``helper2``, respectively.
Call sites (that use a literal ``True`` or ``False``) will be rewritten to use the
specialised versions.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

1. Here is the new BNF for ``SPECIALISE`` pragmas::

     pragma ::= ...
             |  '{-#' specialise_keyword activation rule_foralls specexp [ '::' type ]'#-}'  -- (1)

>              |  '{-#' specialise_keyword activation qvar '::' type ',' types1 '#-}'          -- (2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             |  '{-#' specialise_keyword activation qvar '::' type ',' types1 '#-}'          -- (2) DEPRECATED
```

     specialise_keyword ::= 'SPECIALISE' | 'SPECIALIZE' | 'SPECIALISE INLINE' | 'SPECIALISE INLINE'

     specexp ::= qvar
              |  specexp aexp
              |  specexp '@' atype

       -- as today
     activation ::= ...  -- this encompasses "[2]" and "[~0]"

       -- as today
     rule_foralls ::= 'forall' rule_vars '.' 'forall' rule_vars '.'
                  |   'forall' rule_vars '.'
                  |   {- empty -}

       -- as today
     types1 ::= types1 ',' type
            |   type

#. The first production (1) includes ``{-# SPECIALISE f :: type #-}`` as a special case
   in which there are no arguments.  The ``:: type`` part is optional, because it is often
   unnecessary if arguments are supplied.

> #. The second production (2) is there only to support the current (implemented but entirely undocumented)
>    possiblity of having multiple types in one ``SPECIALISE`` pragma. With this proposal, GHC will
>    deprecate this form, and remove it altogether after two compiler releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The second production (2) is there only to support the current (implemented but entirely undocumented)
   possibility of having multiple types in one ``SPECIALISE`` pragma. With this proposal, GHC will
   deprecate this form. A new warning `-Wdeprecated-pragmas` (in `-Wdefault`) will be emitted when it is used,
   and GHC may remove support for the syntax altogether after at least three major releases with the warning.
```

    loop [1,2]  -->   loopCons 1 [2]

But ``loopCons`` is a simple non-recursive function, and may well inline (especially if you say ``SPECIALISE INLINE``) ::

    loopCons 1 [2]  -->  x * loop [2]

Now the process can repeat, and the loop is unrolled.

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------
1. This generalises the current syntax for specialisation pragmas in a natural way.
   Indeed, I have written specialisation pragmas using the type applications syntax
   just expecting them to work.

#. Specialisation is now possible for functions with ambiguous types, previously
   impossible.

#. Term-level specialisation is now possible, a new feature that will enable
   users to avoid repetition with no runtime cost.

#. Given how this builds on the existing machinery so nicely, the implementation burden
   is expected to be small.

#. The syntax allowing multiple types to be specified is not documented in the
   `manual <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/exts/pragmas.html?highlight=specialise#specialize-pragma>`_
   and is rarely used, according to a `Hackage search <https://hackage-search.serokell.io/?q=SPECIALI%5BSZ%5DE.*%2C>`_.

>    However, there seems to be no great need to remove the syntax, and so
>    this proposal leaves it untouched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
